HER KINASE INHIBITION IN PATIENTS WITH HER2- AND HER3-MUTANT
CANCERS

ABSTRACT

Somatic mutations of ERBB2 (HER2) and ERBB3 (HER3) are found in a wide range of cancers.
Preclinical modelling suggests that a subset lead to constitutive HER2
activation, but most remain biologically uncharacterized. We sought to
prospectively define the biologic and therapeutic significance of known
oncogenic HER2 and HER3 mutations and variants of unknown biological
significance by conducting a multi-histology, genomically selected,
‘basket’ study utilizing the pan-HER kinase inhibitor neratinib
(SUMMIT; Clinicaltrials.gov NCT01953926 ). Efficacy in HER2-mutant cancers varied
as a function of both tumour type and mutant allele to a degree not predicted by
preclinical models, with the greatest activity seen in breast, cervical and
biliary cancers and with tumours harbouring kinase domain missense mutations.
This study demonstrates how a molecularly driven clinical trial can be used to
further refine our biological understanding of both characterized and novel
genomic alterations with potential broad applicability for advancing the
paradigm of genome-driven oncology.

INTRODUCTION

Genomic profiling of human cancers has identified recurrent somatic mutations
of HER2 ( ERBB2 ) and HER3 ( ERBB3 ), typically
occurring in the absence of gene amplification 1 – 3 . Mutations
in HER2 are clustered in the extracellular, transmembrane, and kinase domains.
Unlike other mutant oncogenes, eg BRAF or KRAS , no
single mutant allele predominates and the precise distribution of mutations varies
by tumour type 4 . In contrast, HER3
mutations cluster primarily in the extracellular domain and to a lesser extent in
the kinase domain. Although HER2 and HER3 mutations are found in a wide variety of
cancers, their overall prevalence does not exceed 10% in any individual
tumour type and more typically the rate is <5% for HER2 and
<1% for HER3.

Biological modelling has yielded conflicting findings addressing the
functional consequences of HER2 and HER3 mutations. Substantial data suggest that a
subset of these mutations lead to ligand-independent constitutive HER2 receptor
signalling and promotes oncogenesis 5 – 7 . The
mechanism of these oncogenic effects appears to differ by variant, with some causing
enhanced HER2 kinase activity and others receptor dimerization 5 , 8 .
Mutations in HER3, which in its wild-type configuration has impaired kinase
function, appear to rely on wild-type HER2 to exert its oncogenic effects 7 . Most preclinical data exploring the
functional consequences of HER2 and HER3 mutations have been generated using
engineered models that overexpress the mutation and thus the results may be
confounded by the known oncogenic effects of HER2 overexpression. Further enforcing
the potential importance of this confounding variable, models of HER2 mutation
generated by gene-editing techniques have failed to demonstrate a malignant
phenotype in the absence of mutations in other oncogenes such as PIK3CA 9 .

Given the significant diversity of HER2 and HER3 mutations, as well as the
challenge of generating preclinical models that recreate their true biology in human
cancers, we sought to define the therapeutic significance of HER2 and HER3 mutations
by conducting SUMMIT – a global, multicentre, multi-histology
‘basket’ study in patients with tumours harbouring these mutations
( Extended Data Fig. 1 ). Patients were
treated with neratinib, an irreversible pan-HER tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which
potently inhibits the growth of HER2-mutant tumours in preclinical models 5 . Tumour tissue and plasma were
collected to facilitate the detailed genomic characterization of patients. Here, we
present the results of this study with a focus on the insights it provides into the
biological and therapeutic significance of HER2 and HER3 mutations in cancer
patients.

RESULTS

Baseline patient demographics are shown in Table 1 and Extended
Data Table 1 . In total, 141 patients (125 with HER2-mutant tumours,
16 with HER3-mutant tumours) received neratinib. These patients were diagnosed
with one of 21 unique cancer types, the most common being breast, lung, bladder
and colorectal cancer (61% of patients treated). As has been seen in
other basket studies 10 , 11 , we identified and enrolled a
number of orphan tumour types including cancers of the biliary tract, salivary
gland, small bowel and vagina, as well as extramammary Paget’s disease
(13% of all patients). Patients tended to be heavily pretreated with
approximately half having received ≥3 prior lines of systemic
therapy.

Enrolled patients had 31 unique HER2 and 11 unique HER3 mutations ( Extended Data Fig. 2 ). The most frequent HER2
mutations were S310, L755, Y772_A775dup and V777 alleles. The HER2 kinase domain
was most commonly mutated (66%), followed by the extracellular
(26%) and transmembrane/juxtamembrane (8%) domains. The
anticipated relationships between the mutated HER2 domain and tumour type were
observed, with extracellular domain mutations predominant in bladder cancer,
kinase domain missense mutations in breast and colon cancer, and kinase domain
insertions in lung cancer 4 .
Missense mutations were the most common class of genomic alteration
(74%) followed by in-frame insertions (22%), the latter
exclusively affecting the kinase domain. Two patients harboured
insertions/deletions and one an in-frame kinase domain-retaining fusion
( GRB7-ERBB2 ) 12 , 13 . HER3
mutations were all missense variants and clustered in the extracellular
furin-like and receptor domains. In total, 87% (109/125) of HER2 and
75% (12/16) of HER3 mutations were at positions now known to be
mutational hotspots 4 . This
pattern of HER2 and HER3 mutations was comparable to the spectrum of
non-truncating HER2 and HER3 mutations observed in previously published genomic
landscape studies, including TCGA and ICGC 4 , although HER2 V777L and Y772_A755dup were more common
in our study cohort (13.6% vs 5.3% and 12.0% vs
2.7%, respectively, Extended Data Fig.
3 ).

When stratified by tumour type, we observed responses to neratinib in
patients with HER2-mutant breast, non-small-cell lung, cervical, biliary and
salivary cancers, which led to expanded enrollment in several of these tumour
types ( Fig. 1a , Extended Data Table 1 ). Neratinib exhibited the
greatest degree of activity in patients with breast cancer (n=25 total,
objective response rate at week 8 [ORR 8 ] 32%,
95% confidence interval [CI] 15–54%)
with responses observed in patients with missense mutations involving the
extracellular and kinase domains, as well as insertions in the kinase domain.
All breast cancer patients were classified as HER2 negative (non-amplified) at
the time of enrolment per established guidelines 14 . Responses were observed in both
estrogen receptor (ER)+ (30%, 6/20) and ER- (40%, 2/5)
tumours. Overall, these breast cancer data are generally consistent with a prior
report 15 . In patients
with lung cancer (n=26), where exon 20 insertions predominate, we
observed only one objective response. Of note, HER2 exon 20 insertions are
paralogous of EGFR exon 20 insertions, which are resistant to first- and
second-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors 16 . Interestingly, the only patient with
lung cancer to achieve a RECIST response had a kinase domain missense mutation
(L755S). Despite the low response rate, the median progression-free survival in
recurrent lung cancer was 5.5 months with 6 patients remaining on therapy for
greater than 1 year, which compares favourably to second-line chemotherapy and
immune checkpoint inhibitors 176 , suggesting that neratinib may still
be having a positive impact on the natural history of this disease. Responses
were also observed in biliary and cervical cancers, and enrolment is ongoing in
these cohorts to better define this activity. No responses were observed in
bladder cancer (n=16) or colorectal cancer (n=12), suggesting
lineage-dependent resistance to single-agent pan-HER kinase inhibition in these
tumour types. In summary, among the HER2-mutants cohorts, breast cancer met the
primary endpoint for efficacy, while lung, colorectal and bladder cancers did
not. For the remaining tumour-specific cohorts, enrolment is ongoing and they
have therefore not undergone final efficacy analysis. Despite preclinical data
suggesting that HER3 mutations can be oncogenic drivers, no responses to
neratinib were observed in patients with HER3-mutant tumours.

When stratified by mutant allele, responses were observed in patients
with tumours harbouring HER2 S310, L755, V777, G778_P780dup and Y772_A775dup
mutations ( Fig. 1b ). Among patients with
HER2 kinase domain hotspot missense mutations (n=42), responses were
noted in four unique tumour types (breast, biliary, lung and salivary gland). By
allele, we observed responses in several kinase domain mutants L755S
(n=4), V777L (n=4) and L869R (n=1). In patients with
HER2 hotspot extracellular domain mutations (S310, n=30), responses were
observed in breast, cervical and biliary cancers (n=1 for each), but not
in bladder cancer where these mutations predominate. Similarly, in patients with
HER2 exon 20 insertions (n=28), responses were observed in two patients
with breast cancer but none were seen in patients with lung cancer where this
class of alterations is most common. In exon 20 insertions, preservation of
glycine at the 770 position, which appears to facilitate binding of covalent HER
kinase inhibitors such as neratinib, did not predict for response as previously
suggested by preclinical modelling ( Extended Data
Fig. 4 ) 18 .
Similarly, the number of amino acids involved in the insertion did not appear to
predict outcome, with responses observed in patients with both 3 (G788_P780dup)
and 4 (Y722_A755dup) amino acid insertions. Finally, among the 15 patients with
HER2 mutations not known to be hotspots, only one responded to neratinib.
Interestingly, this response occurred in a patient with breast cancer and a
complex insertion/substitution (L755_E757delinsS) which, to our knowledge, has
not been observed previously. While this case illustrates that some patients may
be addicted to truly private oncogenic drivers (those arising in only a single
patient), it is also noteworthy that this insertion occurs in a domain that is
the target of recurrent insertions. The absence of clinical activity in the
remaining 14 patients with cancers with non-hotspot mutations suggests that
while the recurrence of a mutation in HER2 is insufficient to define it as
sensitizing to a HER2 kinase inhibitor, the absence of recurrence (ie mutations
that do not occur at hotspot positions) provides circumstantial evidence that
the alteration is unlikely to be a driver.

While the overall numbers of patients in each subgroup preclude formal
statistical comparison, integrating efficacy, mutational and lineage data, we
observed that clinical benefit from neratinib therapy appeared to vary as a
function of both mutational and disease context ( Fig. 2 ). In tumour types sensitive to neratinib therapy, such as
breast, biliary and cervical cancers, responses were collectively observed
across all types and classes of HER2 mutations. In contrast, in lung cancer, a
tumour type that exhibits modest sensitivity to neratinib, response was limited
to a patient with a HER2 kinase domain missense mutation – a class of
mutations with greater in vitro sensitivity to
neratinib 5 . Finally, in
tumour types with intrinsic lineage-based resistance to neratinib, such as
bladder and colorectal cancers, RECIST responses were not observed regardless of
the HER2 mutation, type or class.

All patients received neratinib with mandatory anti-diarrhoeal
prophylaxis. With this regimen, the rate of grade 3 diarrhoea was 22%
( Extended Data Table 2 ), consistent
with previous experience 19 .
Among patients who developed grade 3 diarrhoea, the median time to onset was 10
days and the median duration of the diarrhoea episode 2 days. Patients were
typically managed with dose interruption and reduction, with only 2.8%
permanently discontinuing therapy due to diarrhoea. The remainder of adverse
events were low grade.

There is active debate within the cancer research community as to
whether central confirmation of mutational status before study entry is optimal
for determining trial eligibility for precision medicine studies. To define the
reproducibility of local mutational testing, DNA from archival formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumour and plasma samples were re-sequenced (see Methods).
Thirty-three patients (26 with HER2-mutant, 7 with HER3-mutant) were excluded
from this concordance analysis because the local test used was the same as the
central tumour assay being evaluated. Of the remaining 99 patients with HER2
mutations, adequate material for tumour genomic testing was unobtainable for 26
patients. Overall, concordance in the remaining patients based on central tumour
and/or plasma sequencing was 95% (69/73), with 38 patients assessed by
tissue and plasma, 14 by tissue alone, and 21 by plasma alone. Central testing
identified one locally reported mutation (V773M) as a germline polymorphism and
this patient, with renal cell carcinoma, had progressive disease at first scan.
Central testing in the four cases where the HER2 mutation could not be confirmed
passed all quality-control metrics but in two patients was performed on material
collected ≥3 years after the tissue used for local testing, raising the
possibility that tumour heterogeneity played a role in the discordance. None of
the patients with discordant HER2 results responded to neratinib, and their
median progression-free survival was only 43 days (range: 5–58 days).
Among the 9 patients eligible for concordance testing with HER3 mutations,
tumour tissue was available for central sequencing in eight patients, and
overall concordance was 75% (6/8).

Given the variability of treatment response, even among patients with
the same tumour lineage and HER2-mutant allele, we sought to identify additional
genomic modifiers of response through broader genomic characterization of
tumour-derived DNA (see Methods). First, we explored the relationship between
HER2 amplification and outcome, as this is a well-established predictor of
response to HER2-targeted therapies in patients lacking HER2 mutations. In
total, 17% of patients (15/86) had concurrent ERBB2 mutations and gene amplification. Amplifications preferentially targeted the
mutant allele locus (86%, 12/14 evaluable). Using a dichotomous
definition of clinical benefit (stable disease or partial response lasting
≥24 weeks), ERBB2 amplification did not correlate with
outcome (p=0.50; Fig. 3 ),
suggesting that in the presence of ERBB2 mutations,
amplification may not confer additional sensitivity to irreversible HER kinase
inhibitors. We also explored the relationship of ERBB2 mutation
clonality on outcomes. In the 74 patients with adequate material to allow
definitive assessment of ERBB2 mutant clonality, the HER2
mutation was clonal in 95% (70/74, Extended Data Fig. 5a ). None of four patients with a subclonal HER2
mutation achieved clinical benefit.

Hypothesizing that tumours with an increased tumour mutational burden
(TMB) might be more likely to acquire HER2 mutations without developing
oncogenic dependence (ie passenger mutations), we evaluated whether overall TMB
status affected outcome. Using a previously validated cut-off (≥13.8
non-synonymous mutations per megabase of DNA 2 ), 20% of
patients (17/86) met criteria for high TMB. In total, 24% of patients
(16/66) without clinical benefit versus 5% of patients (1/20) with
benefit met criteria for high TMB, a trend that did not reach statistical
significance (p=0.10).

Next, we evaluated whether the pattern of co-mutations affected clinical
benefit in the subset of patients where broader profiling was available
(n=86). In patients with HER2-mutant disease, coincident mutations in
TP53 and HER3 were enriched in patients with no clinical benefit (nominal
p=0.018 and p=0.064, respectively; Fig. 3 ). While not significant after correcting for multiple
hypothesis testing potentially due to the relatively small sample size, it is
noteworthy that no patients with clinical benefit possessed co-mutation of HER2
and HER3. Concurrent mutation of these genes was observed in multiple cancer
types (breast n=3, bladder n=2, gastroesophageal n=2,
colorectal n=1 and pancreatic n=1) and involved a variety of
unique HER2 and HER3 mutations (n=8 and n=9, respectively).
Expanding our analysis to genomic activation at the pathway level, we identified
somatic mutations of known oncogenic potential and grouped them by those
involving the RTKs/RAS/RAF and PIK3CA/AKT/MTOR pathways, and cell cycle
checkpoints ( Extended Data Fig. 5b ). In
this analysis, aberrations in cell cycle checkpoints were associated with lack
of clinical benefit (p=0.043), while activation of RTK/RAS/RAF also
trended towards a worse outcome (p=0.060). The association between the
cell cycle pathway and lack of clinical benefit appears to be primarily driven
by TP53 mutations, losing significance upon removal of TP53 mutations
(p=0.769). Interestingly, activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, an
established negative predictor of response to HER2-targeted therapy in
HER2-amplified breast cancer 20 – 22 , did
not adversely affect the likelihood of clinical benefit (p=0.753). It is
possible that the clinical impact of concurrent gene/pathway activation may vary
by tumour type, and future disease-specific studies are needed to better define
these associations. Although these were exploratory analyses that will require
confirmation, our results suggest that concurrent activation of specific genes
as well as pathways may act as an additional modifier of response beyond cancer
type and specific HER2 mutant allele.

DISCUSSION

The ability to comprehensively profile cancer at the point of care has made
possible the opportunity to personalize therapy for each patient based on the
compendium of genomic alterations identified 23 . Despite the promise of this approach, implementing this
paradigm in clinical practice has been hampered by significant gaps in knowledge
regarding the biological and clinical significance of the majority of genomic
variants identified 24 . This
challenge is exemplified by the marked diversity and wide distribution of HER2 and
HER3 mutations in human cancers, as well as by the difficulty of generating
preclinical models of these mutations that faithfully recreate their biology in
patients. SUMMIT provides the first comprehensive dataset on the clinical
actionability of HER2 and HER3 mutations. We found that HER2 mutations are
associated with HER2-dependence in a subset of patients with HER2 mutant tumors, but
that response to HER kinase inhibition varies a function of the individual mutant
variant, the tumour types as well as the pattern of co-mutations present.

Although we identified promising preliminary activity for neratinib in
breast, biliary and cervical cancers, the response rate in these tumours was still
lower than with approved therapies targeting oncogenic alterations in EGFR , ALK , ROS1 , and BRAF . The low response rate in lung cancer, where HER2
mutations exhibit mutually exclusivity of other known drivers 25 , is also striking and may in part reflect a
lower potency of neratinib inhibition in Y772_A775dup compared to others insertions
or missense mutants. 18 It is
noteworthy that successfully targeting HER2 activation in other contexts has
historically necessitated drug combinations. For example, single-agent trastuzumab
has a response rate of only ~20% in ERBB2 -amplified
breast cancer 26 , 27 . In contrast, overall survival in ERBB2 -amplified breast and gastroesophageal cancers is markedly
improved by adding trastuzumab to chemotherapy 28 , 29 . More recently,
intensification of HER2 inhibition through combination of two HER-targeted agents
has been shown to result in synergistic efficacy in patients with ERBB2 -amplified breast 30 – 32 or
colorectal 33 , 34 cancers, as well as in HER2-mutant
colorectal cancer xenografts 6 .
Cumulatively, these data suggest that combining neratinib with another HER-targeted
therapy is a rational next step, and SUMMIT has been amended to evaluate this
approach in multiple HER2-mutant tumour types.

SUMMIT represents a continued evolution in the design of basket studies,
which enrol patients on the basis of qualifying mutations rather than tumour type.
The initial generation of these studies focused on evaluating individual somatic
mutations that were already clinically validated in one cancer (eg BRAF V600 in melanoma) in other tumour types 10 , 35 . More recently, basket studies have been used to generate
initial or even practice-changing clinical data of truly novel genomic biomarkers,
especially when these genomic alterations occur at low frequency across a wide
distribution of cancer types 11 , 36 , 37 . SUMMIT extends this concept one step further by
demonstrating for the first time how a single study can be used to simultaneously
evaluate a range of individual variants in HER2 and HER3, each with varying degrees
of prior biologic characterization. This permissive enrolment strategy allowed us to
treat patients harbouring mutations that at the time of enrolment had not been
characterized preclinically as gain of function but were either recurrent or
paralogous to known activating mutations in homologous genes. For example, patients
with previously uncharacterized HER2 variants, such as V697, D769N, and L869R, were
included in this manner and responded to treatment, thus providing initial clinical
proof-of-concept that these mutations confer a gain-of-function phenotype even
before formal biologic characterization. The approach of pairing a permissive
enrolment strategy with allele prioritization based on recurrence, paralogy and
other readily computable features has potentially broad applicability to
implementing genomic-driven oncology 24 . This strategy will take on even greater importance as clinical
testing moves from targeted sequencing to whole exome or even whole genome
sequencing, techniques that will allow for evaluation of an even greater number of
therapeutic hypothesis but will also exponentially grow the number of
uncharacterized alleles we routinely identify.

SUMMIT provides additional insights into the conduct of molecularly driven
oncology studies. Our ability to understand the complex interactions between tumour
lineage, individual HER2 variant, and response to neratinib was only possible
because of the relatively large size of this study (n=141). By comparison,
many of the ‘master/umbrella’ protocols currently underway are
designed to enroll a maximum of 30–40 patients into each genomically defined
treatment arm. Our experience suggests that many of studies of this size may be
inadequately powered to identify the subgroups with true efficacy, assuming that
most genomic alterations will not predict for tumour-type agnostic efficacy. SUMMIT
also demonstrates the feasibility of enrolling patients based on local testing with
patients enrolled on the basis of 30 unique sequencing assays performed in 25
different laboratories. Despite this, concordance on retrospective central review
was extremely high (96%).

An important impediment to progress in oncology has been the limited
availability of preclinical model systems that accurately recreate the complex
biology of human cancer. While significant strides have been made, the wide-scale
profiling of cancer in the clinic provides the potentially transformative
opportunity to rapidly interrogate cancer biology at the bedside in a manner
previously only possible at the bench. Here, we demonstrate how this opportunity can
be leveraged to probe the biology of a diverse set of HER2 and HER3 mutations across
a variety of solid tumours through pharmacological HER kinase inhibition in
patients. In doing so, we found that response to pharmacological inhibition was
based on the characteristics of both tumour type and genomic variant to a degree
that was not predicted by established preclinical models. In summary, SUMMIT
demonstrates how the clinical trial can become an important tool in refining our
understanding of the biological dependencies in human cancers.

METHODS

Eligible patients had histologically confirmed advanced solid tumours
harbouring HER2 or HER3 mutations, an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance score of 0-2 and an unlimited number of prior therapies. Patients
with prior exposure to HER kinase inhibitors and unstable brain metastases were
excluded. HER2 and HER3 mutations were determined by local tumour testing as
routinely performed or ordered by each participating site. In total, 85%
(120/141) of enrolled patients were identified by next-generation sequencing
assays. In 81% of cases (97/120), the next-generation sequencing assay
included full exon coverage for ERBB2 or ERBB3 , while in 19% (23/120) of cases only select exons
or hotspots were included in the assay design. The remaining 15%
(21/141) of patients were enrolled via RT-PCR, Sanger, pyrosequencing, or mass
spectrometry-based sequencing methods. The study was approved by the
institutional review board or independent ethics committee at each site and
complied with the International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research
Involving Human Subjects, Good Clinical Practice guidelines, the Declaration of
Helsinki, and local laws. Written informed consent was obtained from all
participants.

This was a multi-cohort basket study of patients with solid tumours
harbouring HER2 and HER3 mutations. Patients with HER2-mutant tumours were
enrolled into one of several disease-specific cohorts or an
“Other” cohort for tumour types not otherwise specified; all
patients with HER3-mutant tumours were enrolled to one cohort. Patients known to
harbour both HER2 and HER3 mutations at the time of enrolment were assigned to
the HER2-mutant cohort. Patients were treated with neratinib 240 mg daily on a
continuous basis with mandatory loperamide prophylaxis during cycle 1. The
primary endpoint was ORR 8 , as assessed by investigators according to
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST; version 1.1). Secondary
endpoints included best overall response, progression-free survival, overall
survival and safety. Patients who were not evaluable by RECIST were permitted to
enrol and were evaluated for response by 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose
positron-emission tomography (PET) according to a modified version of the
original PET Response Criteria in Solid Tumors (PERCIST; version1.0) 38 , referred to here as PET
Response Criteria (PRC, Extended Data Table
3 ).

Disease assessments with computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance
imaging or PET/CT (for those evaluated by PRC) were performed at baseline and
then every 8 weeks until disease progression, death or withdrawal. Adverse
events were graded by the investigator according to the Common Terminology
Criteria for Adverse Events (version 4.0) until day 28 after discontinuation of
study treatment.

All samples were assigned anonymized identifiers by the study sponsor
based on the order of study enrolment. Both tumour DNA and tumour-derived
cell-free (cf)DNA in plasma were collected with the goals of confirming locally
reported HER2/3 mutations as well as evaluating how ERBB2/3 copy number and clonality as well as co-mutational pattern affected outcome.
Collection of archival tumour and plasma samples was mandatory for all patients.
Next-generation sequencing was performed utilizing targeted sequencing of
pretreatment DNA from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumour and matched blood
specimens (preferentially) and cfDNA (if tumour was not available or was
inadequate). A custom single-gene ERBB2 capture next-generation sequencing test
was also performed on pretreatment cfDNA in a subset of patients with
HER2-mutant disease.

For patients with adequate material, DNA from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (n=91) or tumour-derived cell-free DNA from plasma
(n=15) and matched germline DNA (n=102) underwent targeted
next-generation sequencing assay using Memorial Sloan Kettering-Integrated
Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets (MSK-IMPACT) 39 , producing an average of 738-fold
coverage per tumour (range: 253–1383). Briefly, this assay utilizes a
hybridization-based exon capture designed to capture all protein-coding exons
and select introns of oncogenes, tumour suppressor genes and key members of
pathways that may be actionable by targeted therapies. In this study, either 341
(n=18) or 410 (n=88) key cancer-associated genes were used
( Supplementary
Information ). Sequencing data were analysed as previously described
to identify somatic single-nucleotide variants, small insertions and deletions,
copy number alterations and structural arrangements 40 . Additionally, hotspot alterations were
identified using an adaptation of a previously described method 41 applied to a cohort of 24,592
sequenced human cancers 42 . For
gene level analysis, select genes within our targeted 341/410 MSK-IMPACT panel
involved in the RTK/RAS/RAF, PIK3CA/AKT/MTOR, and cell cycle checkpoint pathways
were selected using the KEGG pathway database 43 . For pathway level analysis, only
potentially oncogenic alterations in the selected genes were included and
determined to be oncogenic by OncoKB (version September 2017), a curated
knowledge base of the oncogenic effects and treatment implications of mutations
and cancer genes (oncokb.org 44 ).

For patients in the HER2-mutant arm with MSK-IMPACT sequencing data
(with matched germline DNA, n=74), the Fraction and Allele-Specific Copy
Number Estimates from Tumour Sequencing (FACETS) algorithm (version 0.3.9) was
used to estimate tumour purity and ploidy, total and allele-specific copy
number 45 . Tumour
samples with purity <20% were excluded from the analysis. Focal
HER2 amplifications for tumours with MSK-IMPACT and FACETS data were inferred
using the following criteria: fold change ≥1.5 (MSK-IMPACT tumour:normal
sequencing coverage ratio) and total HER2 copy number ≥4 copies
(FACETS-derived total copy number). To infer clonality of each HER2 mutation,
cancer cell fractions (CCFs) were estimated with 95% confidence
intervals by integrating FACETS-derived joint segmentation and MSK-IMPACT
mutation data as input into the ABSOLUTE algorithm 46 (version 1.0.6). Mutations were
classified as either clonal or subclonal based on the following criteria: clonal
if the estimated CCF >0.85, otherwise subclonal. For patients with HER2
amplification, the mutation copy number (mutation multiplicity) was calculated
as previously described 47 to
infer amplification of the mutant allele when the mutation multiplicity was
greater than half of the total HER2 copy number.

Tumour mutational burden (TMB), defined as the number of non-synonymous
mutations per megabase, was calculated for patients with MSK-IMPACT sequencing
data (n=106) 6 .
Microsatellite instability (MSI) was assessed for patients with HER2-mutant
tumours with matched germline DNA sequencing data (n=89) using an
orthogonal bioinformatics tool, MSIsensor 48 . Additionally, mutations were decomposed into the
thirty constituent mutational signatures as described previously 49 . Briefly, MSIsensor scores
<10 were classified as microsatellite stable and >10 were
considered MSI-High using a previously validated cut-off score 50 . Those with a MSIsensor score
of <10 but having evidence of a dominant mismatch repair mutational
signature were also considered MSI 45 , 49 .

For each HER2-mutant tumour type and the HER3-mutant cohort, a Simon
optimal two-stage design with a true ORR 8 ≤10% was
considered unacceptable (null hypothesis) whereas a true ORR 8 ≥30% (alternative hypothesis) merited further study. Efficacy in
each cohort was analysed independently and the study was not designed to
formally compare efficacy across cohorts. All patients who received at least one
dose of neratinib were included in the safety and efficacy cohorts. All data
reflect an interim data-cut taken on 10 Mar 2017 from patients enrolled up to 16
Dec 2016 ( Extended Data Fig. 6 ). Most
patients were off therapy at the time of data analysis ( Extended Data Table 4 ). Progression-free survival
was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. The study is registered at
Clinicaltrials.gov, NCT01953926 . Individual associations among genomic changes
and response were assessed by either Fisher’s exact or chi-squared tests
(where appropriate) and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using
Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

Chi-squared or Fisher’s exact tests were performed to compare
gene-level and pathway-level associations between the dichotomous clinical
benefit groups. P-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using
Benjamini-Hochberg correction. HER2 and HER3 lollipop distribution plots were
generated using ProteinPaint 51 . All other figures were generated using R software ( http://www.R-project.org/ ).

All datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study,
including patient-level clinical data as well as all sequencing data have been
deposited and are publically available in the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics
under the accession code “SUMMIT, Nature, 2018” ( http://www.cbioportal.org/study?id=summit_2018 ). All
figure source data are also provided at www.nature.com/nature .

EXTENDED DATA

Five tumour-specific HER2 ( ERBB2 )-mutant cohorts
were pre-specified (endometrial, gastroesophageal, ovarian, colorectal and
bladder/urinary tract). In addition, a sixth “Solid tumour
(NOS)” HER2-mutant cohort allowed for enrollment of patients with
any other cancer types. A sufficient number of patients with breast,
cervical, biliary and lung cancer were enrolled in the “Solid
tumours (NOS)” cohort to permit independent efficacy analysis using
the same design as the pre-specified cohorts. Patients with HER3
( ERBB3 )-mutant tumours were enrolled in a HER3-specific
cohort regardless of tumour type.

CBR, clinical benefit rate; cfDNA, cell-free
[tumour] DNA; CI, confidence interval; FFPE, formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded; MSKCC, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center;
MSK-IMPACT, Memorial Sloan Kettering-Integrated Mutation Profiling of
Actionable Cancer Targets; NGS, next-generation sequencing; NOS, not
otherwise specified; ORR, objective response rate; ORR 8 ,
objective response rate at week 8; PET, positron-emission tomography; PFS,
progression-free survival; RECIST, Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors.

Each unique mutation is represented by a circle, with the circle
size and number representing the frequency, and coloured to show the
mutation class as indicated in the legend. The corresponding amino acid
change and common hotspot mutations (shown in pink) are labelled next to the
circles.

Distribution of a) HER2 and b) HER3 mutations observed across our
cohort in comparison to the spectrum of HER2 and HER3 mutations (reflected
lollipop) from publically available datasets (TCGA, ICGC, other published
studies).

a) Percent best change and PFS plots corresponding to each type of
exon 20 insertion (colour coded by synonymous amino acid change). Three
cases with no change are indicated in colour-coded circles above the x-axis.
b) Zoomed-in schematic of all exon 20 insertions positioned by their amino
acid co-ordinates and frequencies. c) Five unique types of exon 20
insertions observed in the study with the resulting full amino acid
sequences (insertion indicated in red).

PET, positron-emission tomography; PFS, progression-free survival;
RECIST, Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors.

a) Cancer cell fractions with 95% confidence intervals and
clonality status of all HER2 mutations in 74 patients with sufficient
sequencing data ordered by increasing clinical benefit (weeks on therapy).
b) Comparison of the percent activation of known oncogenic alterations in
the three pathways between the patients of clinical benefit (n=20,
biologically independent samples) and no benefit (n=66, biologically
independent samples). Nominal Fisher’s p-values shown.

SUMMIT Consort Diagram.

Patient demographics and efficacy by cohort CI, confidence interval;
ORR, objective response rate; PFS, progression-free survival.

Treatment-emergent adverse events (occurring in ≥10%
of patients)

PET response criteria CT, computed tomography; FDG-PET, 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography; SUVmax,
maximum standardised uptake value.

Patient disposition by cohort NOS, not otherwise specified.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL