WHOLE-GENOME CHARACTERIZATION OF MYOEPITHELIAL CARCINOMAS OF THE SOFT TISSUE

ABSTRACT

Myoepithelial carcinomas (MECs) of soft tissue are rare and aggressive tumors affecting young adults and children, but their molecular landscape has not been comprehensively explored through genome sequencing. Here, we present the whole-exome sequencing (WES), whole-genome sequencing (WGS), and RNA sequencing findings of two MECs. Patients 1 and 2 (P1, P2), both male, were diagnosed at 27 and 37 yr of age, respectively, with shoulder (P1) and inguinal (P2) soft tissue tumors. Both patients developed metastatic disease, and P2 died of disease. P1 tumor showed a rhabdoid cytomorphology and a complete loss of INI1 (SMARCB1) expression, associated with a homozygous SMARCB1 deletion. The tumor from P2 showed a clear cell/small cell morphology, retained INI1 expression and strong S100 positivity. By WES and WGS, tumors from both patients displayed low tumor mutation burdens, and no targetable alterations in cancer genes were detected. P2's tumor harbored an EWSR1::KLF15 rearrangement, whereas the tumor from P1 showed a novel ASCC2::GGNBP2 fusion. WGS evidenced a complex genomic event involving mainly Chromosomes 17 and 22 in the tumor from P1, which was consistent with chromoplexy. These findings are consistent with previous reports of EWSR1 rearrangements (50% of cases) in MECs and provide a genetic basis for the loss of SMARCB1 protein expression observed through immunohistochemistry in 10% of 40% of MEC cases. The lack of additional driver mutations in these tumors supports the hypothesis that these alterations are the key molecular events in MEC evolution. Furthermore, the presence of complex structural variant patterns, invisible to WES, highlights the novel biological insights that can be gained through the application of WGS to rare cancers.

INTRODUCTION

A key challenge in the clinical management of very rare cancers (<1 case per 100,000 person-years) is that very little is known about targetable alterations that these tumors may harbor. As a result, patients with very rare cancers do not benefit from therapeutic innovations that have been tailored to the molecular features of more common tumor types. More fundamentally, it is uncertain which of these rare cancers, often defined primarily on the basis of histomorphology, represent molecular cohesive disease entities.

Myoepithelial carcinomas (MECs) of soft tissue and skin are very rare tumors with an incidence rate of 0.0018 (soft tissue) and 0.0007 (skin) per 100,000 person-years ( Zhang et al. 2017 ) that mainly affect young adults, and ∼20% of cases occur in children ( Gleason and Fletcher 2007 ; Jo and Fletcher 2015 ; Jo 2020 ). They have an aggressive clinical course, with local recurrence or metastases reported in 40%–50% of cases, and the therapeutic approach is not well-codified ( Jo and Fletcher 2015 ). In the World Health Organization (WHO) 2020 classification of Soft Tissue and Bone Tumours, MECs are included in the chapter “tumors of uncertain differentiation,” possibly because their cellular counterpart in normal mesenchymal tissue has not been identified ( WHO 2020 ). Because of a wide range of possible cytological, architectural, and immunophenotypic features ( Suurmeijer et al. 2020 ), MECs represent a heterogeneous and still evolving entity and may prove to be under-diagnosed.

Recurrent genomic alterations, which frequently involve the 22q11–12 region, have been identified in MECs by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and chromosome banding analysis, as well as Sanger sequencing over the EWSR1 locus. About 50% of cases harbor rearrangements of EWSR1 ( Antonescu et al. 2010 ; Jo and Fletcher 2015 ) with various possible 3′ fusion partners ( Brandal et al. 2008 , 2009 ; Antonescu et al. 2010 ; Agaram et al. 2015 ; Huang et al. 2015 ; Cajaiba et al. 2016 ; Stevens et al. 2018 ) or, alternatively, rearrangements of FUS ( Huang et al. 2015 ), a paralog of EWSR1 located on Chromosome 16. The second recurrent molecular finding demonstrated by immunohistochemistry is the loss of expression of SMARCB1 (also known as INI-1 or BAF47) ( Gleason and Fletcher 2007 ; Hornick et al. 2009 ; Le Loarer et al. 2014 ), a core subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, observed in up to 40% of MECs and associated with SMARCB1 deletions in a subset of cases ( Le Loarer et al. 2014 ).

Despite the identification of the above recurrent molecular events, a complete genomic landscape of MEC has not been reported to date. As a result, it is unclear whether additional driver alterations may play a role in MEC evolution. Soft tissue tumors are generally enriched in structural variations ( Cortés-Ciriano et al. 2020 ), much of which are invisible to targeted genomic profiling including panel and whole-exome sequencing (WES). This suggests that more comprehensive sequencing might be helpful in uncovering novel MEC drivers. To address this knowledge gap, we performed WES, whole-genome (WGS), and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on two MEC cases from our institution.

RESULTS

Patient characteristics and outcomes are summarized in Table 1 .

Clinical characteristics of the two patients with myoepithelial carcinoma and summary of available samples

Histopathologic analysis was performed for 12 samples ( Table 1 ), comprising one primary tumor sample for each patient and five samples of metastases or local recurrence for each patient. Morphological and immunohistochemical features of all samples were consistent with MEC. This included trabecular architecture and the presence of myxoid stroma, observed across all tumor samples ( Fig. 1 ). However, morphological and immunohistochemical differences were also noted between the two patients, in keeping with the heterogeneous nature of MEC ( Suurmeijer et al. 2020 ). Tumor samples from Patient 1 showed a prominent plasmacytoid or rhabdoid cytology and a complete loss of nuclear INI-1 expression. In contrast, tumor samples from Patient 2 showed small round cell and clear cell cytology, a biphasic growth pattern, strong diffuse S100 expression, and retained INI-1 expression. Notably, these distinct histopathologic features were stable from primary tumor to metastasis for each patient. All IHC findings are summarized in Table 2 , and were also consistent across samples from each patient.

Histomorphology (HE) and representative immunostainings in the two cases: Patient 1, plasmacytoid and rhabdoid cytology, positive epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) staining, and negative S100 staining; Patient 2, small cell and clear cell cytology, positive EMA, and S100 staining. Scale bar, 50 µm.

Summary of immunohistochemical findings and SMARCB1 FISH results in tumors from the two patients (primary samples) with myoepithelial carcinoma

(FISH) Fluorescence in situ hybridization, (EMA) epithelial membrane antigen, (Pan-CK) pan cytokeratin, (SMA) smooth muscle actin, (GFAP) glial fibrillary acidic protein, (+++) diffuse positivity, (++) heterogeneous (patchy) positivity, (+) focal positivity (10% of tumor cells), (+/−) positive in isolated cells, (−) negative.

SMARCB1 deficiency is seen in >95% of malignant rhabdoid tumors (RTs) ( Versteege et al. 1998 ), and up to 70% of RTs show loss of expression of another SWI/SNF subunit, SMARCA2 (BRM) ( Kahali et al. 2014 ). To investigate possible similarities between MECs and RTs, we assessed BRM expression in MEC using immunohistochemistry (IHC). In both cases, BRM showed a heterogeneous staining pattern, with alternating areas positive and negative for nuclear BRM expression ( Supplemental Fig. S1 ). Heterogeneous BRM expression has previously been observed in RTs ( Yoshida et al. 2017 ; Andrianteranagna et al. 2021 ), which could indicate some similarities between MECs and RTs with respect to SWI/SNF biology.

To get a preliminary genomic landscape of MEC, we performed WES on 12 MEC samples from the two patients and normal adjacent tissue (mean coverage: 98.5×, range: 83×–119×). Comparison of tumor samples and normal adjacent tissue demonstrated low tumor mutational burden across all MEC samples (mean 1.35 mutations/Mb, range 0.43–2.98), including the metastatic/recurrent samples ( Supplemental Fig. S2 ). Results are summarized in Supplemental Table S1 . Only a few variants in Tier 1 or 2 genes (as per COSMIC Cancer Gene Census) were found, including a p.E830G missense POLE mutation (predicted as probably damaging by the PolyPhen-2 tool) in three samples from Patient 2; a p.R1239P NUMA1 mutation (probably damaging) in Patient 2—sample 5; a LARP4B p.V449F (probably damaging) in Patient 2—sample 4; and a few other variants all predicted as “benign.”

Soft tissue sarcomas, including Ewing sarcoma, have been previously associated with high burdens of complex structural variants (SVs) ( Anderson et al. 2018 ). Because WES is limited in its ability to assess SVs, we used WGS to profile the primary MEC tumors from Patients 1 and 2 (median Patient 1 tumor coverage—29×, Patient 2—22×) and their matched benign tissue (median Patient 1 normal coverage—25×, Patient 2—15×). Analysis of somatic mutations, gene dosage, and gene fusions revealed five alterations in known cancer genes as annotated by the Sanger Cancer Gene Census ( Fig. 2 A; Table 3 ). Notably, the MEC from Patient 1 (MEC1) harbored a homozygous loss of SMARCB1 and NF1 , whereas the MEC from Patient 2 (MEC2) showed an in-frame EWSR1 (Chr 22) ::KLF15 (Chr 3) fusion, consistent with previous studies. MEC2 additionally showed a missense mutation of CREB1 , an EWSR1 fusion partner in other soft tissue sarcomas. MEC2 harbored a high level (>10 copy) amplification of ELK4 , an ETS family transcription factor that is a target of oncogenic cis- splicing in prostate cancer ( Zhang et al. 2012 ); this was also confirmed by WES in all samples from this patient.

Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) landscape of two myoepithelial carcinoma (MEC) cases. ( A ) Matrix of key genomic alterations, purity, ploidy, tumor mutational burden, and single-nucleotide variant (SNV) signatures in MEC1 and MEC2. Purity/ploidy statistics and gene level alterations resulting from SNV and copy-number alterations. ( B ) Counts of distinct classes of structural variants across the two MEC cases. ( C ) CIRCOS plots for both cases showing (from outer to inner) karyogram, binned read depth, segmented copy-number alterations, and rearrangements junctions in the inner circle. ( D ) Zoomed-in view of a complex amplicon on Chr 1 in MEC2, leading to the copy gain of two Cancer Gene Census genes to more than 10 copies each. This includes ELK4 , which encodes an ETS transcription factor in the TCF family, not previously associated with soft tissue sarcomas.

High-impact variants by projected loss of function detected in two myoepithelial carinomas

Mutational signature analysis ( Fig. 2 A) revealed a substantial fraction of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in both patients with COSMIC Signature 3, a trinucleotide context SNV pattern that has previously been associated with homologous recombination (HR) deficiency, and a defect in DNA repair ( Polak et al. 2017 ). Some 36.8% and 17.4% of SNVs were attributable to Signature 3 in MEC1 and MEC2, respectively. We examined both MEC genomes for somatic alterations in genes encoding the HR pathway and other genome integrity factors; however, no such alterations were detected with a high level of confidence.

Although both genomes were nearly diploid ( Fig. 2 A), they harbored a large spectrum of structural variants, including simple events (translocations, duplications, deletions, and inversions) and more complex patterns (templated insertion chains, chromoplexy, chromothripsis, and double minutes) ( Fig. 2 B). Examining the MEC1 genome for additional protein-coding structural variants revealed a fusion of the 5′ portion of ASCC2 , which encodes Activating Signal Cointegrator 1 Complex Subunit 2 (Chr 22), to the 3′ portion of GGNBP2 , which encodes a zinc finger DNA binding protein Gametogenetin Binding Protein 2 (Chr 17). Notably, in MEC1, the loss of SMARCB1 and NF1 as well as the ASCC2::GGNBP2 fusion appeared to be part of the same complex SV cluster targeting Chromosomes 17 and 22 and others, in an otherwise simple genomic background ( Fig. 2 C). Similarly, the ELK4 amplification in MEC2 was the result of a complex, nested, and focal pattern of high-copy duplication junctions on Chromosome 1q, suggestive of a double minute, a type of large extrachromosomal circular DNA ( Fig. 2 C,D). As with MEC1, the remainder of the MEC2 genome was quiet.

To validate and assess expression of these protein-coding gene fusions, we performed RNA-seq on both MEC1 and MEC2 tumors. Transcriptome analysis (RNA-seq) confirmed expression of the ASCC2 (exon 2):: GGNBP2 (exon 3) fusion transcript in MEC1 ( Fig. 3 A,B), which we additionally validated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) followed by Sanger sequencing ( Supplemental Fig. S3 ). Transcriptome analysis also confirmed the expression of a previously described EWSR1 (exon 8):: KLF15 (exon 2) fusion transcript in MEC2 ( Fig. 3 C,D).

Mapping and validation of protein-coding gene fusions detected in two myoepithelial carcinomas (MECs). Patient 1 ( A , B ): A schematic representation of the ASCC2::GGNBP2 gene fusion in MEC1, including exons and introns, but not showing the exact breakpoint ( A ), with corresponding whole-genome sequencing (WGS) representation using JaBbA ( B ). Patient 2 ( C , D ): A schematic representation of the EWSR1::KLF15 gene fusion, including exons and introns, but not showing the exact breakpoint ( C ), with corresponding WGS representation using JaBbA ( D ). ( E ) Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) fusion assay for MEC1 ( ASCC2 , red; GGNBP2 , green), which failed to confirm the fusion, but consistently shows a reduced size of one of the two red signals (arrows). ( F ) FISH fusion assay for MEC2 ( EWSR1 , red; KLF15 , green), revealing fusion signals (arrows).

For additional validation of these gene fusions, we performed fusion FISH assays. For the ASCC2::GGNBP2 fusion in MEC1, combining a telomeric (5′) ASCC2 probe and a telomeric (3′) GGNBP2 probe did not reveal a fusion signal; however, it showed that one of the two ASCC2 signals was smaller in size ( Fig. 3 E). This was consistent with WGS, which showed a heterozygous deletion at the 5′ end of ASCC2 ( Fig. 3 B). A FISH assay combining a centromeric EWSR1 probe and a centromeric KLF15 probe confirmed the gene fusion in MEC2 ( Fig. 3 F).

We next sought to investigate in more detail the mechanism of SMARCB1 and NF1 locus deletion in MEC1. Visualization of this locus revealed a single large cluster of 32 (primarily) long-range and interchromosomal SV junctions whose break ends were very proximal (within 150 Kbp) to each other ( Fig. 4 A), causing the loss of both NF1 and SMARCB1 ( Fig. 4 B). FISH confirmed complete absence of the SMARCB1 gene ( Fig. 4 C) and IHC showed tumor-specific loss of SMARCB1 protein expression ( Fig. 4 D). This junction pattern, spanning Chromosomes 17, 19, and 22, was consistent with a large chain of quasi-reciprocal rearrangements called a chromoplexy ( Baca et al. 2013 ), previously observed in Ewing's sarcoma ( Anderson et al. 2018 ). To better understand the evolution of this complex locus, we first analyzed allelic copy number at heterozygous parental single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We found only focal loss of heterozygosity across the three affected chromosomes, suggesting that this chromoplexy may have simultaneously rearranged both parental alleles. To address this question more directly, we deconvolved the rearrangement and junction patterns into linear haplotypes using gGnome ( Fig. 4 A). This analysis revealed six complex derivative chromosomes spanning both parental haplotypes of Chromosomes 17 and 22. We conclude that a single punctuated >30-way rearrangement targeted both parental alleles in MEC1, explaining the biallelic copy loss of NF1 and SMARCB1 and the ASCC2::GGNBP2 fusion.

Complex structural variants in MEC1 (Patient 1). ( A ) Genome graph of a biallelic chromoplexy involving Chrs 17, 19, and 22 in MEC1. From bottom, karyogram and normalized binned read depth are plotted across the three chromosomes. The genome graph shows the copy number at genomic regions linked by reference (gray) and variant (green) junctions. Loose ends (blue) represent copy changes that cannot be mapped to a rearrangement. The top tracks represent derivative chromosomes, each plotted as a distinctly colored path of genomic segments along the genome, which when summed explain the copy profile. The variant junctions form a reciprocal cluster, all harboring break ends within 150 Kbp of each other, indicating that they likely occurred simultaneously in tumor evolution as a chromoplexy event. These junctions are distributed across six derivative alleles of the three chromosomes, resulting in biallelic deletion NF1 . SMARCB1 is targeted by an additional deletion junction that may have occurred before or after this complex punctuated event. ( B ) Zoom-in on genome graph ( top ) and read depth ( bottom ) from graph in A , showing biallelic inactivation of NF1 and SMARCB1 . ( C ) Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for SMARCB1 in Patient 1 showing complete absence of the SMARCB1 locus (red probe) and persistence of the Chr 22 centromere (green); admixed benign cells (arrow) represent positive internal controls. ( D ) Immunohistochemistry (IHC) demonstrates complete loss of nuclear INI-1 (SMARCB1) expression in the tumor cells. Scale bar, 50 µm.

DISCUSSION

Because of the rarity of soft tissue MECs, diagnostic difficulties related to incomplete characterization of MECs as a group, and a wide range of possible pathologic features, the molecular underpinnings of this entity are challenging to study. Here, we show that MECs display a strikingly low point mutation rate compared to other cancers ( Lawrence et al. 2013 ), consistent with what is often seen in gene fusion–associated malignancies ( Yoshihara et al. 2015 ). Our findings are in keeping with a previous case report of a soft tissue MEC interrogated via targeted sequencing, which found a low mutation burden (1 mutation/Mb) and no alterations in known cancer genes, except for a frameshift in MAP3K6 ( Stevens et al. 2018 ). Conversely, in the only published case of a soft tissue MEC interrogated through WES, albeit without a germline control, truncating mutations in tumor suppressor genes RB1 and MED12 were identified ( Hoggard et al. 2017 ). Our WGS analysis here additionally demonstrates that loss of tumor suppressors in MECs may result from complex structural events, the spectra of which are as yet uncharacterized in MECs.

Complete loss of SMARCB1 (INI-1) expression by IHC is seen in 10%–40% of MECs ( Gleason and Fletcher 2007 ; Hornick et al. 2009 ; Le Loarer et al. 2014 ) and can be associated with homozygous SMARCB1 deletion on FISH ( Le Loarer et al. 2014 ). Consistently, we observed homozygous SMARCB1 deletion and loss of expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in Patient 1. Biallelic inactivation of SMARCB1 , which encodes a core member of the chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF, can be seen in various tumor types, but is particularly recurrent in malignant rhabdoid tumors, epithelioid sarcomas, and medullary carcinomas of the kidney ( Versteege et al. 1998 ; Le Loarer et al. 2014 ; Calderaro et al. 2016 ). In MECs, it remains unclear whether SMARCB1 inactivation contributes to oncogenesis or whether it is a bystander event due to recurrent alterations of the 22q11–12 region. To our knowledge, we also show for the first time that BRM (SMARCA2) expression follows an “alternating” pattern in MECs, with the existence of a BRM-negative tumor cell population; however, this remains to be confirmed in a larger cohort.

Our WGS results reveal that a >30-way biallelic chromoplexy event may have simultaneously caused biallelic NF1 loss as well as the loss of SMARCB1 and a novel ASCC2 :: GGNBP2 fusion in MEC1. The latter was not supported by FISH, most likely due the resolution of the assay—the region of ASCC2 involved in the fusion (the first two exons only) is too small to be detected by the FISH probe. Interestingly, the deletion of the second copy of SMARCB1 involves a simple deletion junction that may have occurred independent of this event. Although chromoplexy is frequent in Ewing sarcoma and prostate cancer ( Baca et al. 2013 ; Anderson et al. 2018 ), the finding of a punctuated SV that targets both parental homologs is unprecedented, to our knowledge. This finding raises the question of how both parental alleles might get entangled in such a rearrangement, as well as the degree of selective pressures (i.e., for NF1 and SMARCB1 ) that might raise the probability of such an unlikely event.

Notably, this chromoplexy pattern was also annotated as a chromothripsis. Chromothripsis is the product of chromosome shattering and random loss and religation of DNA segments within micronuclei or in anaphase bridges ( Maciejowski et al. 2015 ; Papathanasiou et al. 2022 ) and is sometimes difficult to distinguish from chromoplexy. Although the clustered SV patterns and oscillating copy number may qualify this locus as a chromothripsis, the minimal amount of copy-number loss (3.74 Mbp of the 109.8 Mbp of Chromosomes 17 and 22) is less typical for chromothripsis. These observations make chromoplexy a more likely explanation for this pattern. Although the mechanistic basis of chromoplexy is unclear, one candidate is a chain reaction of “half crossovers” mediated by break-induced replication as a consequence of replication fork collapse ( Wu and Malkova 2021 ). The role of chromoplexy and these mutational processes in the evolution of MECs and other soft tissue sarcomas (including Ewing sarcoma) is an exciting area for future investigation.

About 50% of MECs harbor rearrangements of EWSR1 ( Antonescu et al. 2010 ; Jo and Fletcher 2015 ), for which the 3′ fusion partners may include POU5F1 , PBX1 , PBX3 , ZNF444 , KLF17 , KLF15 , or ATF1 ( Brandal et al. 2008 , 2009 ; Antonescu et al. 2010 ; Agaram et al. 2015 ; Huang et al. 2015 ; Cajaiba et al. 2016 ; Stevens et al. 2018 ). Alternatively, fusions involving FUS , a paralog of EWSR1 , as the 5′ partner and KLF17 as the 3′ partner, have been described ( Huang et al. 2015 ). The EWSR1::KLF15 rearrangement identified in Patient 2 has previously been reported in six MECs and in one benign myoepithelial tumor, in various anatomic sites ( Cajaiba et al. 2016 ; Stevens et al. 2018 ; Patel et al. 2019 ; Suurmeijer et al. 2020 ; Bodis et al. 2021 ). In contrast to Patient 2 (age at diagnosis: 37 yr), all previously reported cases occurred in children and adolescents, except for one parotid gland tumor diagnosed at 20 yr ( Stevens et al. 2018 ). Interestingly, previously described tumors and the disease of Patient 2 show microscopic similarities, including a biphasic morphology, a “small round cell” appearance (which may erroneously lead to the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma), focal clear cell features, diffuse S100 expression, and retained INI-1 expression. Taken together, this case further supports the recently proposed hypothesis that MECs with an EWSR1::KLF15 rearrangement may represent a distinct subgroup of tumors with characteristic pathologic features ( Suurmeijer et al. 2020 ).

The ASCC2::GGNBP2 in-frame fusion transcript identified in Patient 1 (by WGS and RNA-seq) has not been reported to date. GGNBP2 encodes Gametogenetin Binding Protein 2, a zinc-finger DNA-binding protein also known as ZNF403. Although little is known about GGNBP2 function, GGNBP2 knockdown in human cell lines has been shown to result in cell cycle arrest, impair anchorage-independent growth, and decrease cell migration ( Guan et al. 2012 ). Of note, in some recurrent rearrangements previously identified in MECs, the 3′ fusion partner also encodes a zinc finger protein ( KLF17 , KLF15 , or ZNF444 ) ( Brandal et al. 2009 ; Antonescu et al. 2010 ; Huang et al. 2015 ; Cajaiba et al. 2016 ; Stevens et al. 2018 ). This raises the possibility that GGNBP2 fusion may be a proliferative driver in MECs. ASCC2 (Activating Signal Cointegrator 1 Complex Subunit 2) is part of the ASC-2 transcriptional coactivator complex ( Goo et al. 2003 ; Kong et al. 2003 ) and may bear functional similarities to EWSR1 and FUS in their roles as regulators of transcription and RNA splicing , although functional studies are needed to assess for this possibility. Intriguingly, Thway et al. (2015) reported a case of soft tissue MEC with a prominent rhabdoid morphology, loss of INI-1 expression and an atypical EWSR1 break-apart FISH pattern, whereas Le Loarer et al. (2014) reported three MEC cases with rhabdoid features, loss of INI-1 expression, and no EWSR1 rearrangement. Thus, it could be interesting to investigate the presence of GGNBP2::ASCC2 fusions in MECs without EWSR1 rearrangement, in particular those with rhabdoid features. The ASCC2::GGNBP2 fusion junction in this case exists amongst set of 17–19–22 translocations, which collectively comprise a complex event consistent with chromoplexy.

Although recurrent rearrangements involving the 22q region are a known finding in MEC, we report for the first time WGS results in two MECs, allowing us to better understand the nature of these events. In a recent WGS analysis of 124 cases of Ewing sarcomas, Anderson et al. (2018) provided evidence that all EWSR1::ERG fusions and ∼40% of EWSR1::FLI1 fusions in these tumors arise through complex, loop-like rearrangements involving chromoplexy or chromothripsis (mechanisms of chromosome shattering involving one or multiple chromosomes). The authors extended their analysis to other tumor types and identified similar chromoplectic events in cases of chondromyxoid fibroma, synovial sarcoma, and phosphaturic mesenchymal tumors ( Anderson et al. 2018 ). Based on our WGS findings, MECs may expand the spectrum of tumor types in which gene fusions arise through chromoplectic loop-like rearrangements, rather than via a simple reciprocal fusion. This is consistent with a previous case report of an MEC in which CGH array, which suggested the presence of a complex rearrangement between Chromosomes 3, 22, and possibly some other genomic regions ( Stevens et al. 2018 ). Of note, similar to EWSR1 and ETS-family genes brought together in Ewing sarcoma, nearly all gene rearrangements reported to date in MEC, including the two described herein, involve two genes with opposing genomic orientations.

Our whole-genome analysis suggests that the molecular landscapes of MECs is not homogenous, which raises fundamental challenges for a tumor that is very rare. A key remaining question is distinction between MECs and Ewing sarcoma, given that both have small round cell morphology and harbor EWSR1 rearrangements. However, unlike Ewing sarcoma, MECs typically lack CD99 expression and do not show rearrangements of ERG or FLI1 . A second important differential diagnosis is extrarenal malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) for MECs that display INI-1 loss and a rhabdoid morphology. Similar to MECs, MRTs also show a low mutation burden ( Lawrence et al. 2013 ) and may harbor alterations at the 22q locus beyond the SMARCB1 gene ( Chun et al. 2016 ). Further studies are needed to determine biological differences and similarities between MEC and MRT, and the possibility of some degree of molecular overlap between these entities should be considered.

CONCLUSION

We report the molecular characterization of two cases of soft tissue MEC, which revealed low tumor mutation burden and no actionable alterations in known cancer genes, including in the metastatic and recurrent samples. Instead, we observed genomic rearrangements consistently involving the 22q11–12 region, associated with focal copy-number alterations and gene fusions. Further studies are needed to assess the incidence and significance of EWSR1::KLF15 fusion and the newly identified ASCC2::GGNBP2 rearrangement in MEC. The chromoplexy described in the case of Patient 1 is demonstrative that tumorigenesis may arise subsequent to large scale genomic rearrangement, which raises the prospect of inquiry into the mechanisms of instability or preconditions necessary for large-scale events such as these to occur. Analysis of structural genomic variants in other MEC cases may yet uncover patterns of complex variants, which will help to clarify the degree to which large-scale and complex structural events play in the tumorigenesis of this rare tumor type. Additionally, soft tissue MEC likely expands the spectrum of tumors in which gene fusions may arise through complex rearrangements, rather than by simple translocations.

METHODS

The study was performed under institutional review board-approved protocols that include WCM IRB # 1007011157. Two cases of MEC were identified in our surgical pathology archives. Tumor morphology was reviewed by pathologists with expertise in soft tissue pathology (B.P.R., J.M.M.).

WES was performed on one fresh-frozen and five formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples from Patient 1 (P1), on six FFPE samples from Patient 2 (P2), and on benign FFPE tissue for both patients (germline control). We used a previously described ( Rennert et al. 2016 ; Beltran et al. 2015 ) clinical-grade WES test (EXaCT-1). Briefly, DNA was extracted using Promega Maxwell 16 MDX. Libraries were constructed using targeted capture of 21,522 genes with the HaloPlex System (Agilent), followed by paired-end 2 × 100 bp sequencing with Illumina HiSeq2500, for an intended mean target exome coverage of 80× for both the tumor and the germline samples. Reads were aligned to the human genome (reference GRC37/hg19) and data were analyzed using an internally developed pipeline ( Rennert et al. 2016 ).

RNA-seq was performed on one fresh-frozen sample from P1 and one FFPE sample from P2. RNA was extracted using Promega Maxwell 16 MDX and RNA integrity was verified using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies). cDNA was synthesized from total RNA using Superscript III (Invitrogen). Sequencing was performed using Illumina HiSeq2500 in 2 × 75 bp paired-end mode, and generated an average of 45 million reads per sample. All reads were independently aligned with STAR_2.4.0f for sequence alignment against the human genome build hg19, downloaded via the UCSC genome browser ( http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg19/bigZips/ ), and SAMTOOLS v0.1.19 for sorting and indexing reads ( Li et al. 2009 ). For fusion analysis, we used STAR-fusion (STAR-Fusion_v0.5.1) and FusionCatcher (v0.99.3e). Fusions with significant support of junction reads and spanning pairs were selected and manually reviewed.

IHC was performed on sections of FFPE tumor tissue using a Bond III automated immunostainer and the Bond Polymer Refine detection system (Leica Microsystems). Slides were deparaffinized, and heat-mediated antigen retrieval using the Bond Epitope Retrieval 1 solution at pH6 (H1) or Bond Epitope Retrieval 2 solution at pH9 (H2) or enzyme-mediated antigen retrieval (E1) was performed. The following antibodies and conditions (dilution, antigen retrieval solution, antigen retrieval time) were used: anti-INI-1 (BD Bioscience bd612110, 1/100 H2, 30 min), anti-EMA (Leica PA0035, H1, 20 min), anti-pancytokeratin (Leica PA0909. RTU, Enzyme Treatment, 10 min), anti-SMA (Leica PA0943, RTU, no pretreatment), anti-S100 (Leica PA0900, RTU, Enzyme Treatment, 10 min), anti-GFAP (Leica PA0026, RTU, H2, 20 min), anti-p63 (Biogenex, clone 4A4, 1/50, H2, 30 min), and anti-Brm (Cell Signaling Technology, clone D9E8B, 1/200, ER1, 30 min). Immunostains were evaluated by two study pathologists (J.M.M. and J.C.).

WGS was performed on one fresh-frozen sample from Patient 1 and one FFPE sample from Patient 2. Library preparation and WGS was performed at the New York Genome Center (NYGC) to a target 80× tumor and 40× normal coverage. Short-read genomic DNA library preparation was performed with the TruSeq DNA PCR-free Library Prep Kit (Illumina). Quality control was assayed for the final libraries with the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer by using the DNA 1000 chip (Agilent Technologies). Quality control determined that libraries contained an average peak height (fragment size) of 400 bp. Libraries were sequenced on HiSeq X machines (Illumina) to generate paired-end 2 × 150 bp reads. Reads were aligned to the GRCh37/hg19 reference using Burrows–Wheeler aligner software ( Li and Durbin 2009 ) (bwa aln, v.0.7.8). Best practices for postalignment data processing were followed through use of Picard ( https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/ ) tools to mark duplicates, the GATK (v.2.7.4) ( https://software.broadinstitute.org/gatk/ ) IndelRealigner module, and GATK base quality recalibration. Junction balanced allelic genome graphs were constructed from junctions and coverage data using the JaBbA ( Hadi et al. 2020 ) tool. Subsequent calling of complex structural events was performed based on characteristics of identified junction clusters. To identify rearranged derivative alleles, walk reconstruction was performed across clusters of junctions with break ends within 150 kb on the genome graph using the gGnome peel function as previously described ( Hadi et al. 2020 ).

FISH was performed on 4 µm FFPE tissue sections; the complete protocol is described in Supplemental Methods . Dual FISH probes for the SMARCB1 deletion assay were prepared using BAC clones RP11-71G19 ( SMARCB1 ) labeled red and RP11-551L12 (control probe, i.e., telomeric EWSR1 or 22q12.2) labeled green (BACPAC Resources). For ASCC2::GGNBP2 and EWSR1::KLF15 fusion assays, probes labeled with fluorophores were provided by Empire Genomics (Williamsville), and the following BACs were used: RP11-794O14 ( ASCC2 , orange), RP11-141B22 ( GGNBP2 , green), RP11-367E7 ( EWSR1 , orange) and RP11-319C18 ( KLF15 , green).

RNA was isolated from tumor tissue and cDNA generated using qScript cDNA SuperMix (QuantaBio). For the ASCC2::GGNBP2 fusion transcript, PCR amplification was performed using a fusion-specific primer pair (forward: 5′-ACTCCAGATCACCCACAAGG-3′; reverse: 5′-GGGACAAGCTGAGAAAGTGC-3′). Sanger sequencing was performed using the same primers for forward and reverse sequencing, respectively.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

WES data can be found at the publicly accessible repository cbioportal.org. Interpreted WGS variants were submitted to ClinVar ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/ ) and can be found under accession numbers SCV002758653–SCV002758746. WES data were deposited to cBioPortal (study reference: stmyec_wcm_2022).

Research was conducted under WCM IRB protocol #1007011157 (Comprehensive Cancer Characterization by Genomic and Transcriptomic Profiling), which allows for utilization of next-generation sequencing of de-identified biospecimens. Following the NIH Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) policy, informed consent is not required to generate genomic data from research or clinical specimens collected before January 25, 2015). Further, one of the two patients is now deceased.

The authors are thankful to the Center for Translational Pathology at the WCM Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (Mai Ho, Leticia Dizon, Bing He) for technical assistance and support and to colleagues of the Computational Biology team (Alexandros Sigaras, Pooja Chandra, Jeffrey M. Tang, and Noah Greco) for their assistance to create the cBioPortal cohort.

This project was supported by the Caryl and Israel Englander Institute for Precision Medicine at Weill Cornell Medicine.

The authors have declared no competing interest.

Patience Odeniyide
Anonymous

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL